I'm Elliot Gerson from the Aspen
Institute and I'm absolutely delighted
to welcome all of you here this evening
I think now that we've been doing events
like this over Linda Jamie how long has
it been now three years it's really
becoming a Aspen family in New York some
of you I've seen it many of these others
this is the first time I've seen you and
I hope many of you will become regulars
we're expanding our presence in New York
I'm delighted to say not just with these
wonderful events but with other ones as
a matter of fact we have our first New
York ideas program next week for those
of you who know the Aspen ideas festival
in Aspen we're doing something on a
somewhat smaller scale here in New York
at the New York Historical Society next
Tuesday night and Wednesday and even
though it's it's sold out for those of
you here in the family if you're
interested you can talk to me or Jamie
afterwards and I'm sure we can find a
way to sneak you in but it's as I said
great to have you all here at our home
away from home this magnificent and
historic house I want to thank Jennifer
Rabb of Hunter College for making this
available we couldn't have a better
venue in New York given the values that
we have at the Aspen Institute than this
splendid home of Sarah Franklin and
Eleanor Roosevelt and of course this
program is part of another wonderful and
larger program which is the series of
conversations that we have about great
leadership conversations in honor of the
late Preston Robert Tisch a man who made
incredible contributions to the country
especially of course to this city a
leader in business a leader in
philanthropy
a leader in sport and that leadership in
philanthropy has been carried on
splendidly by his children by by Steve
Tisch by Lizzy and Jonathan Tisch and of
course by Lori Tisch and also now
especially through the generosity of the
Lori M Tisch illumination
we have two wonderful friends of the
Aspen Institute whom we're going to be
listening to and it's my pleasure to
turn things over to Lori to introduce
them and have a few words Thank You
Elliot on behalf of my family thank you
for joining us thank you everyone for
joining us for another program in the
Aspen Institute leadership series
conversations with great leaders in
memory of my father preston robert ich
as Elliott said Aspen Institute develop
this new New York City based program to
challenge our thinking by gathering
leaders and journalists to engage in
dialogue about regional and national
issues on business activism and public
service government journalism
philanthropy and healthcare the arts and
sports all topics my father would have
loved discussing I actually actually
often think of the series as something
similar to his beloved Regency power
breakfast only without the $10 orange
juice um you've had it among the
innovative leaders who have been a part
of Aspen's leadership series our newark
Mayor Cory Booker artist and actor Anna
deavere Smith JP Morgan CEO Jamie Dimon
and sports grades Billie Jean King and
Mark Messier tonight I am so pleased
pleased to introduce another such
individual my good friend and someone
for whom I have the utmost admiration
and respect dr. Siddhartha Mukherjee Sid
is the author of the Pulitzer
prize-winning tour-de-force now quoting
Amazon tour-de-force
the Emperor of all maladies and as a
professor of medicine at Columbia
University and staff physician at
Columbia's Medical Center in a spare
time
Sid travels to art shows with his wife
Sarah Z the recipient of a 2003
MacArthur Genius grant and the artist
recently chosen to represent the United
States at the 2013 Biennale I have read
SIDS book and urge all of you to do so
so that you will understand why this
biography is cancer has been called a
gripping
page-turner now think about that a
biography of cancer called a gripping
page-turner that's quite an
accomplishment now I'm going to quote
again from Amazon Mukerjee is like a
kaleidoscope at first look you
experience him as a writer of
page-turning stories term another way
and he's a highly effective communicator
of cellular biology turn him a third
time you get superb science writing turn
him a fourth time he is the grandeur and
broad sweep of an excellent historian if
only I had read his book in my teens I
would have found my life's career and
another quote
and finally the quest for the Cure is
the basis of all science and research
and dr. mukajee's witness superb tone in
language that we can all attempt to
understand cancer always be with will
always be with us dr. mukajee hopes and
we can out with this devil and survive
with one out of every to one out of
every three females and one out of every
two males in the United States afflicted
by this dreadful disease I think it is
accurate to say that just about every
person in this room has had a direct
experience with cancer themselves or
with a close family member or friend it
is quite clear that the war on cancer is
far from over and the work and influence
of people like Sid is more crucial than
ever I'm also pleased to introduce
another friend and a spin mate although
it seems to be working much better for
her katie couric one of televisions most
respected and beloved journalists so why
katie well about three months ago i had
a dinner and with sarah and sid and we
were talking about this event and we
said so who should we get to moderate
and Sid said do you think we could get
Katie Couric that would be so perfect
and we did as you all know katie has
been a key journalist on every major
network and has held countless candid
in-depth interviews with
newspapers from the with newsmakers from
the worlds of business politics medicine
and entertainment but she is equally
renowned for her tireless and extremely
successful work as an advocate for stand
up to cancer and as co-founder of the
National colorectal cancer Research
Alliance and as always many many thanks
to the Aspen Institute leadership and
staff as I say every time my father
would be so proud and honored by the
series and of course to Hunter College
president Jennifer Raab for hosting this
terrific program at Roosevelt House
it is now my very great pleasure and
honor to give them give the florida's
sid and sara and katie there whoa
Sara - Sara whoo
okay thanks Rick hi everybody
good evening Thank You Lori we're both
said and I are both honored to be here
to pay tribute to your wonderful death
as a part of this series and I'm going
to try to show the many sides of Sid and
I'm not going to say SIDS last name
because I'm sure to bungle it so I think
we're on a first-name basis so I wanted
to start you know I do want to actually
talk about your humanistic side and your
writer side and your science side but I
wanted to start by just giving people a
bit of background on you said you went
to Stanford you went to Oxford as a
Rhodes Scholar than to Harvard Medical
School so your classic underachiever why
did you decide why did you all my safety
schools by the way
kidding I'm kidding so why did you
decide to go into oncology what was it
that drew you to that field first of all
thank you thank you for hosting this
Thank You Laurie for allowing this to
happen and and it's a wonderful forum I
my interest in oncology really came from
the reverse in some sense i was in
england and i had the opportunity to do
a PhD and i thought I would do a PhD in
immunology this was a time when we were
just beginning to understand the immune
system in a way that we now understand
much more clearly and there was one
person at Oxford Alan Townsend
who I'd never met and I picked up I was
an undergraduate and I knew I was going
to Oxford I picked up the phone and Alan
doesn't have a secretary this is a great
thing not to do not to have in life
never have a secretary because he picked
up the phone himself and we had a
conversation and I said you know I'm
really interested in what you're doing
and he said we'll come and work with me
because Alan had solved a very important
problem immunology which is very
relevant to cancer we want to come back
to that and the problem is called the
inside out problem which is it's such a
simple idea which is if viruses like
cancer-causing viruses live inside cells
how can the immune system look at this
at this thing if the virus is inside the
cell naming system is outside
how can a virus how can the immune
system ever find a cell that's infected
by a virus
you could you could you could be taking
a walk on the river and you would ask
yourself this question
Alan was taking a walk on the river one
morning and he asked himself this
question how on earth could the immune
system see viruses because they're
hidden inside cause they're hidden
inside and Alan solved the inside-out
problem for which he got numerous awards
but it's all being said our problem it
turns out that the immune system advil
thank you all right and say exactly
Alan solved inside out problem by
showing that in fact the every cell
chews up pieces of virus and presents
them to its outside surface
like little flags and the immune system
rapidly evolved actually sponges evolved
to do this and and and so he solved this
problem and so when I went to Alan's lab
I asked the flipped question which is
called which I call the outside-in
question which is if that's the case why
aren't we eliminating cancer viruses why
is it that you know human papilloma
virus which is associate with cervical
cancer or hepatitis B virus you know if
that's the case
influenza goes away from our bodies why
does hepatitis B not go away right so I
focused on a particular virus and I was
looking at cells being a cell biologist
and then something clicked in me and I
and I want to talk about that click
something clicked in me and I think it's
the most amazing thing that can happen
to a scientist something clicked in me
and it was the idea that there's more to
it than cells they're human beings from
whom the cells are coming there is
Henrietta Lacks who was a human being
from whom the cells came so and so I
sort of backed into oncology you know
looking at the microscope and then sort
of backing up from the microscope until
I thought that I'd become a clinical
oncologist and that was my my particular
journey I know that writing this book
was prompted by a question from a
patient of hers who said I'm going to
had stomach cancer I believe who said
I'm going to keep fighting this disease
but I really need to know what it is I'm
fighting and people have often asked me
what exactly is cancer what causes it
and I know that you can give an
explanation that's quite distilled and
and simple so before you tell us about
the patient and and how she motivated
you to really look at the history of
cancer how would you describe what
happens and then I'll tell you how I
describe it but you describe it okay
I'll go first you go back cancer is an
illness of AB the abnormal growth the
dysregulated growth of cells this growth
is caused typically not always but
typically caused by the very by by the
dysregulation of the very same genes
that control normal growth in other
words the very genes that allow our
embryos to grow or hands to grow our
heads to grow
if their job is to allow cells to grow
and to put brakes on selves when they
stop growing cancer is a dysregulation
of that process so it's like cell cell
division out of control that is correct
is a cell division out of control and in
doing so it also cancer cells also
evolve so it's an evolving cell division
out of control the evolution is very
critical it makes it unlike any disease
that we know in in physiology and
perhaps in history because cancer is as
someone described as cancer is like
watching Darwin's Galapagos Islands
inside your body because the cells are
evolving constantly in real time right
and that's what makes it an incredible
challenge right and I know there's
somebody that's pretty much how I
describe it just kidding I always say
it's a series of DNA or Sur sort of
screw-ups
yep and ultimately everybody has sort of
cancer in their body
right but the p53 tumor suppressor gene
is the final thing that washes it so you
have to have a whole series of things
that are going awry before the cells
start to divide and take over your body
yes right that's exactly I also say
often say that it's like you know people
think of cancer is this monolithic enemy
and I always say it's like a thousand
but probably a million different
diseases in a million different
biologies and I know that's something
that you talk about in the book as well
right
it's a very important that it's a very
important point which is that the genes
that control the growth of breast cells
are somewhat different not all
completely different than the genes that
control the growth of prostate cells or
the genes that control the growth of
skin cells in melanoma right they're
similar but somewhat different every
organ has its own set of controls and
when you have cancer in those organs
typically these organ specific genes are
the ones that are being screwed up but
on the flip side I think we also have to
be careful and this goes back in this
very very soon becomes an incredibly
important political question LOX have to
be careful to oversee low cancer there's
there's a feeling in the advocacy
community and some end of the advocacy
community that one dollar given to
breast cancer is one dollar taken away
from prostate cancer well I give the
exam
that in fact we have learned more about
breast cancer from prostate cancer than
from any other cancer in in one could
make the argument more about breast
cancer prostate cancer than even breast
cancer itself because the only the whole
idea of using hormonal therapy really
comes with a crossover idea that comes
like a traceless in my book who would
have thought that hormones could be used
in this particular way to cross over
from prostate cancer into breast cancer
but Charles Huggins did in Chicago he
figured this out and so we have to be a
little bit resistant as we move ahead in
making too many silos at the same time
but but also said about the the
different biologies in other words not
only can you not have a
one-size-fits-all treatment for all
different kinds of cancers but each
individual may respond differently you
know when my husband was sick and we
were he was having chemotherapy I always
felt like it was so primitive even this
was 14 years ago that doctors sort of
threw something against the wall to see
what would stick that they couldn't
really determine how a patient would
respond and even if a patient is
responsive it's often very short-lived
yes
you know this response rate is very
misleading for people have cancer
because you're like yay I responded and
then as Sid said it's so clever and so
you know really demonic and its ability
to morph into something that's more
effective than the cancer right that's
sorry then the treatment rather it's
very frustrating yet I forget what I was
going to ask you but anyway so so it's
so it's people respond very differently
to the treatments right so that's why
personalized medicine is so exciting in
terms of the wave of the future
it is extremely exciting but we have
again a note of caution about
personalized medicine it is impossible
to personalized medicine to every person
there's a kind of there's a semantic
crisis in describing that there are six
hundred thousand men and women who will
die of cancer in the United States I
will guarantee you that every
being sitting in this audience today has
already had a first-degree relative who
has experienced cancer in their
lifetimes and I would guarantee you that
we will we will this will continue this
is not someone else's problem this is
our problem
so if you cannot invent six hundred
thousand individual medicines to address
the 600,000 variants of cancer that are
causing cancer deaths so what then is
that line it's a very subtle line
between over personalized we can't
personalize every piece of it how does
one appreciate the diversity of course
and in cancer but still remain true to
the idea that you could still create
groups of medicines that work for groups
of people and that's a big question
you know you were talking about sort of
the cross pollenization of saved
prostate cancer treatment and breast
cancer and you know I want to talk about
the history of cancer but just on that
subject do you think one of the most
exciting areas and Sid and I talked
about this on the phone is that these
therapies are becoming less organ
specific yes it's really more about how
a cancer behaves or what kind of protein
it may be secreting so there can be
therapies for different kinds of cancer
from the same thing like I did a story
on a girl who had a childhood brain
tumor down in in Philadelphia
a chip I think and then just chop chop
right Children's Hospital for
Philadelphia and then this place the
same treatment for melanoma yes because
it had to do with a hedgehog pathway is
that right whatever that means but it
was basically the same treatment was
being used for these two cancers and I
think you're seeing that more and more
right absolutely what actually goes back
the woman who inspired and provoked
maladies the one who inspired the book
had a gastrointestinal stromal tumor I
call it a stomach cancer but really it
was a kind of sarcoma now under the
microscope a gastrointestinal stromal
tumor a gist or just as we call them
looks nothing like a leukemia it behaves
nothing like a leukemia this is a solid
tumor that grows
in the abdomen typically it presents
with these fox eye cells the spindle
shaped cells the pathologists have
beautiful words for very ugly diseases
but Fox eye is a is a is a word that
often is you spindle shaped cells looks
nothing like the blood cancer called
chronic myelogenous leukemia but in the
1990s scientists we researchers
discovered that this form of
gastrointestinal stromal tumors which
this lady had but Germain had shares a
gene a cousin Jean with the leukemia and
in fact Breivik imatinib
treats both of them now if you were if
you did not understand the genetic
anatomy of cancer you would never
imagine that there was a relationship
between these two tumors one of the
solid tumor tumor the other tumor of the
blood which seemed to have nothing to do
it with each other except they share
cousin genes melanoma great example
right looks like very unique doesn't
have any relationship with other cancers
but in fact some melanomas are related
actually to that same gastrointestinal
stromal tumor gene some melanomas are
related to lung cancer so it's as if the
entire imagine the human and human
anatomy is being reorganized not in term
because cancer is a genetic disease not
in terms of organs but in terms of genes
and imagine now you can reimagine a
human being
as these as sharing these organs sharing
these pieces of genetic information as
it were which is really exciting
exciting I know when when the patient
that we refer to said I want to know
what I'm treating you realize you didn't
know how to answer her question and so
you embarked on this book and and I
think in the book you say the first
mention of cancer is I think it's 1600
BC that right and it was on a papyrus
and it was described as some kind of
breast tumor and then under treatment it
said none yes but then you mentioned Sid
in the book that for something like
2,000 years after that cancer wasn't
even mentioned not only a medical
literature but in any kind of literature
it vanishes why we don't know exactly
why
but we suspect that the rise of cancer
incidence becomes very relevant today
the rise of cancer incidence has to do
with a changing in the age structure of
the population people didn't live long
enough to get cancer they died of
smallpox and typhoid and typhus and
various other things tuberculosis well
into the early part of the nineteenth
century
in some ways it is it is the fact that
we have now lifted these you know I've
seen the book cancer is cancer is
revealed in the double negative when the
killers are killed it is what remains
now the two important points to be made
about that one point is a point that I
often make which is make no mistake that
although cancer is an age-related
disease that it does not affect people
of all ages if you take if you take just
the men and women under 50 in this
country who will die of cancer every
year you still have hundreds of
thousands of patients these people will
young men and women under 50 right so so
there is an age relatedness to it but
it's not only age-related so now the
second point is that in fact what we're
finding out is that cancer in the
elderly behaves somewhat differently and
cancer in young men and women we don't
know why cancer and younger people
generally more aggressive it is
generally more aggressive but more
treatable in the elderly it's generally
more indolent and less treatable I mean
it's a big conundrum we don't know why
now that's a very gentleman because as
you age your cells divide less rapidly
or something is that of something where
it's so there is one explanation for it
and it's it's an interesting explanation
let me go through it because it's
actually it lends to a very particularly
very interesting form of thinking and
goes back to your question which is a
cancer one of the reasons you could ask
a simple question much like Alan
Townsend walking on down the river you
could ask yourself why aren't we
bursting with cancer all the time what
what is it that prevents us all of us
sitting here from growing cancer cells
all the time and there's several answers
to the question one one answer is that
the immune system is doing something to
regulate the appearance of cancers but
perhaps the most one of the most
striking answers this question was
provided by several
searches with among them Bert vogelstein
at Johns Hopkins who in a series of
extremely important seminal papers in
the 1980s and 1990s figured out that
cancer not you don't you've got you
don't you can't get to cancer by
mutating just one gene you need many
many genes on the order of 10 12 15
genes 15 of these growth regulatory
genes to be mutated before you get to
cancer so in other words ultimately when
a cancer becomes a cancer it has
accumulated not one change in DNA not
one mutation but about 10 or 15 and
maybe even more hundreds in some cases
now the theory is that in childhood
cancers the genes that are mutated are
big ugly genes so these are genes that
have large control of growth processes
and so it's death by not being ordered
over use the metaphor by a large strike
whereas in adult cancers particular
cancer in the elderly it is many many
many small gene mutations so it's death
by a hundred cuts now what's interesting
about it is that in general if you have
a car and the axle of the car breaks you
can generally fix that car because you
can fix the axle on the other hand if
you have a car and there are 15 pieces
of the car that I've broken small pieces
like the battery is broken and the
speedometer doesn't work etc so that's a
much harder fix so that is one
explanation a theoretical explanation to
the conundrum of why children's cancers
may be easier to treat the nettle
cancers but it's a theoretical
explanation not to mention that elderly
people have a harder time tolerating it
this is a there are six quarts body
treatments after you know were used for
so long you know you talked about in the
book and in the 1950s I thought this was
so interesting that a woman tried to
take out a classified ad in the New York
Times to find a breast cancer support
group and the editor at the time said
this was in the early 50s we can't say
the word breast or cancer in the paper
how about disease of the chest wall yes
and I call it death by euphemism yeah
anyway but I'm just curious when and why
did cancer become such a taboo subject
any people I know that many people have
relatives they want to get their
family history but they don't even know
a a relative died of cancer B
specifically where with where the
primary tumor was because doctors just
didn't give that kind of information to
patients and there was an element of
shame vanishing the disease and where
did that come from was it because how
hopeless it seemed it was the shame that
comes from nihilism really it was a
shame that comes from being unable to do
anything it's the it's you know I
interviewed actually for my book I
interviewed about any one of them very
moving interviews was from a palliative
care nurse who had worked in the 60s and
she said to me actually a line that
really struck me I struck me almost in
it I was so moved by line she said
doctors were allergic to the smell of
death they were so so hopeful that and
and when when they when they couldn't
succeed you you had the patient had
failed I mean we still I mean I still we
still in in the vocality of cancer say
the patient has failed chemotherapy
obviously in fact the patient is not
faking video therapy is for the patient
but but but in fact we still say use the
word failure in in a clinical context
and so this idea of failure what does it
mean to fail makes you embarrassed makes
people embarrassed there's a there's a
line in the book which is we which is
buried in somewhere of a woman you know
Cecily Saunders the physician nurse who
invented the discipline of palliative
care and I point out in the book it was
no less an invention than an inhibitor
for b-raf you know it was required no
less ingenuity no less daring to invent
palliative care in the face of this kind
of medicine in the 1950s and 1960s Lee
Saunders quotes in her book and I picked
the picture like it's a title of a whole
section of my book a woman who says to
her doctor bone breast cancer in England
ancestor doctor will you turn me out if
I don't get better if i if I'm not
responding to the chemotherapy will you
throw me out of hospital
and this was a common question if I
don't respond am i a reject Amaya prior
and hence the shame
hence the the idea that you know we'd
rather not look at the smell of death
we'd rather not smell the smell of death
and so for the same
similarly you talked about this in an
article in The Guardian which is
something that really sticks in my craw
and I'm so glad you addressed it SID
which is the whole notion that a
positive attitude helps you deal with
cancer because nothing bugs me more than
to hear people say that now that's not
to say it's not helpful yes that it's
not psychologically uplifting but I
always say cemeteries are full of people
who had the will to live yes but their
biology just wasn't working and that
biology and the treatment just did not
come together and get them it's too glib
this idea I'm no I'm good and it's too
simplistic it's too naive you know but
that's a very common sort of attitude
you know I think perpetrated even though
I have so much admiration for Lance
Armstrong I feel like his sort of whole
deal I wanted to say well testicular
cancer is one of the most curable
cancers by the way and not that I don't
admire his tenacity and yes and Drive
but it just I think it does such a
disservice to people who are dealing
with the disease and their families to
suggest that someone didn't have a
positive enough attitude or a well to
live it's an unbelievably paternalistic
thing to say imagine someone saying it
to you you know imagine end and it is an
incredible it really it really it's a
kind of medieval paternalism about
medicine which is you know it's all in
your mind anyway you know you're
hysterical because you know something's
wrong with your uterus the kind of the
classical medieval explanation I'm glad
I got that off my chest thank you okay
so one of the things that you talk about
is how I mean that the history of cancer
is so fascinating obviously we can't
deal with all of it here tonight
although wish we could because I could
talk to Sid for hours but one of the
things you talk about is in the first
half of the nineteenth century how
primitive the surgery was and how
primitive the treatments were
and specifically mastectomies which is
is more as better yeah tell us a little
bit about that and where that thinking
came from and how it got so out of
control well the story goes back to we
actually goes back to the 16th and 17th
centuries and it is also a story of
frustration and shame and it was very
simply that surgeons by that certainly
by the early 19th century had learned to
operate technically had learned to
operate and remove cancer from the
breast from the stomach but they didn't
know what to do with relapses women
would still relapse with breast cancer
and Charles Moore a surgeon had actually
created a kind of dart board in which a
drawing as it were of mapping the
position of the relapses and found that
many of the relapses with women were
local relapses they were relapsing at
the site of surgery and this idea that
that that the reason that cancer was not
being cured was because there was local
relapse to essentially ignited the world
of cancer it took fire and it appeared
on a man who was somewhat he was
gunpowder to that fire and that's
William Halsted he'll said was is
probably still the most technically
accomplished surgeon in surgical history
he invented the discipline he was a
masterful surgeon at Hopkins he among
other things had experimented with using
cocaine as an anesthetic while he was in
Europe and in in a week's in a couple of
weeks time had become addicted to
cocaine but it was all secret this was
all completely silent and secret the
treatment for cocaine at that point of
time was to give them morphine so he
became addicted to morphine and cocaine
but it just the kind of doctor you want
to have on your side right and he was so
unbelievably disciplined that we know
from records that he would essentially
perform operations dosing himself on
cocaine and morphine so that he could
have the perfect control and he did he
was an amazing innovator but he took
this theory this idea that more we
aren't curing cancer because you aren't
cutting enough cancer
away to its nth limit to its technical
or technological limit but to its also
to its intellectual limit and
unfortunately didn't work he kept trying
but the mastectomy is were not just for
I mean I mean he removed ribs people
were I mean really I mean not even
disfiguring almost dismembering right I
mean practically tell us about some of
the pivotal figures that most impressed
you obviously not that guy in always but
that I know you talk about Sidney Farber
for example and he's a real hero to you
in terms of the war on cancer which we
can talk about after that about Richard
Nixon and that whole declaration but why
was Sidney Farber's so impressive and
maybe you can share with everyone how he
started the Jimmy Fund which is still
very vibrant today what city Farber has
City farmer's role in the history of
cancer he has two roles and that's
what's interesting to me he has a role
as a physician an inventor of one of the
earliest forms of chemotherapy for
childhood leukemia a disease if you had
childhood leukemia in 1950 you were
guaranteed a hundred percent of the
children would die by 1960s that number
was about 40 percent now the number is
about 10 percent so it is a remarkable
progress in that particular variant of
leukemia leukemia Farber stimulated that
by creating the first chemotherapy
through a series of discoveries helping
found the chemotherapy for leukemia but
Farber's role in this history is not as
a chemotherapeutic doctor there are many
people who did similar things Farber's
role is his in what I call that his
second invention his transition which is
he he began to realize by the 1950s and
certainly by the 1960s that cancer
needed something more and that was a
political platform that the voice of
Danny Rosa now the woman who couldn't
write to the New York Times to talk
about breast cancer had to become a non
silent voice that had to become a voice
that we could all hear and it was the it
was the voice of as we now know who was
the voice of everyone and every three
women one in
every two men so that voice had to be
heard and so far Berbick can't began to
become what i call a political scientist
in which he came out of the laboratory
out of his little burrow he has yet a
room which was no bigger than maybe this
corner at the bottom of the what is now
the Children's Hospital in Boston and
began to go to Washington the mr. Farber
went to Washington and he began to
create a platform and he had the
legitimacy to do so and he liaised with
among other people Mary Lasker and David
they formed a partnership what was great
about him too is I think he became a
master marketer of cancer because he
understood that you had to personalize
the disease so he had a patient who was
a little boy you know sort of a poster
child of an adorable little boy who had
a strange name like I can or something
so he was everything was perfect about
this child except his name his name was
ina Gustafson yeah that's it and he was
from Maine he was from he was a child of
Swedish immigrants from from Maine and
and so Farber said you know Einar
Gustafson fund for cancer so he called
him Jimmy and so and that's the Jimmy
Fund right he was he understood this
idea if I were almost almost
instinctually with an almost an animal
instinct he understood that for cancer
to become a national to have a national
voice it needed these kinds of icons he
had learned actually from the polio
campaign he had learned he'd studied
very intensely he'd studied the polio
campaign and figured out the March of
Dimes and he'd figured it out he'd
mapped it out much like a scientist maps
out a pathway you can see his sort of
the cogs of his brain working in the
1950s you can see they're working with
Mary Lasker in the 1950s figuring out
how do we make this happen and this was
really the first intersection of science
philanthropy and advocacy exactly that
really had that happen I mean it
happened with polio all right it
happened a little happy polio because
cancer right in Canada yes but but but
yearly it was one of the first even you
know even in that world it was one of
the first um how there's I want
there's so many things I want to ask it
but let's talk about environmental
factors only because I'm kind of
obsessed with that right now and in
terms of cancer things that cause cancer
what why is there been so little
research on things in the environment
whether you're talking about pesticides
or food additives or cellphones and
things like that obviously they're
working to try to make some kind of
connection if there is in fact a
connection believe it huh probably is
not probably it's not because that the
radio frequency is so low I don't when
my cell phone gets really hot and it's
right up I think I'm getting a brain
tumor but no no okay
I feel I special okay but but what do
you think about that and why hasn't that
gotten more attention
well it's getting more attention now
some of it is a problem actually and
this goes back to the conversation we're
having which is you know part of the
reason that the ultimate reason I wrote
this book was you know nature abhors
vacuums and the media abhorred vacuums
and but it produces conspiracies it took
to occupy these vacuums and there is a
conspiracy theory that the reason that
we are involved in really looking at
environmental carcinogenesis is because
we don't care about it because we
actually have an invested interest in
this audit I don't believe it I think it
is because it's a hard problem and I'll
tell you why it's a hard problem it's a
hard problem because if there is a rare
environmental factor which causes a
large increase in cancer risk those are
very easy to find asbestos and a lung
cancer right so rare exposure not a lot
of people exposed to that level of
asbestos and the variant of lung cancer
particularly mesothelioma is a rare
cancer you can pick that out it's like
having then you know two needles in a
haystack you think they come together in
some ways it's like having a lunar
eclipse so now in on the flipside if you
have a common exposure and it increases
the risk very largely you can pick those
out as well so good example is tobacco
smoke so now it's less common but in the
50s and 60s it was a common exposure it
increased the risk of lung cancer by 9
for 10 for depending on the right
circumstances those you can pick out
epidemiologically the real conundrum in
environmental carcinogenesis is to find
common exposures that increase risk by a
small amount those are really hard to
find because and so these are things
like you know you could ask yourself a
question is there are there estrogen
like substances in our food lurking in
our food which are increasing risk of
breast cancer by five percent now you
might think that five percent is not a
very large number but if you have
200,000 women with breast cancer five
percent becomes an extremely large
number and that's a really hard now
imagine how you do that statistically
imagine right so it becomes a it becomes
an incredibly complex mathematical
problem a biological problem because you
can't you can't get at those small
increases but very widespread increases
in risk and so that's the real challenge
in environmental carcinogens and we
think that solving understanding cancer
cells the cell biology will get us over
the problem because we don't have to run
a trial of seven hundred thousand women
who are exposed to estrogen like
substances and we don't even know what
the exposures were versus seven hundred
thousand women who are not exposed and
try to find that increase in risk which
is five percent instead we try to go to
the cell and ask the question is this
substance doing something to the cell
that's acting as a surrogate for this
kind of behavior because cancer clusters
are notoriously difficult to produce
felicitous even though it seems to be so
obvious to an outside observer when a
whole slew of people in one neighborhood
come down with breast cancer and and in
fact we have been extensively probed
there are indeed cancer clusters often
that the reasons are complex one cancer
cluster can occur because there was a
concern Eunice marriage in some area and
therefore they share genes one cancer
cluster can occur because there's a
virus that is social with cancer and
that happened to spread in a
neighborhood a third cancer cluster so
in other words if you were looking at if
you were looking at you know if you were
looking in a very false way at the HIV
epidemic in the you know in the 1980s in
in New York City many of the men were
presenting with Kaposi sarcoma you would
say
there's a cancer cluster there and has
to do with environmental carcinogen no
it has to do with the fact that there's
a behavior that exposing men and later
men and women to a virus so you can be
very misled by the idea of a cancer
cluster and suspecting that there must
be a lurking environmental concern is
there certainly there but we have to be
clever about if we thoughtful about this
and it might just be one factor it you
might be just one fact that that helps
tip the balance that this sort of
genetic mutation gone haywire this we're
going to open it up to questions I think
but I just have one more actually I have
about 10 more but we're only good ask
one more in terms of how cancer is being
approached now there are so much
exciting technology and it seems to be
this confluence of science technology
hopefully public advocacy is working is
is helping to push that as well but you
have nto angiogenesis drugs that take up
cut off the tumors blood supply is
solidified one of those that is might is
one of them yeah and you have
nanotechnology you have monoclonal
antibodies immunotherapy you have
targeted therapy what do you think is
the most exciting thing that's happening
in the field of cancer research and how
I thought it was cute that that your
doctor I think who oversaw you as a
fellow at Boston a guy named David
scattin yeah he wrote that that you have
an internal hope machine or something
like that that you're very optimistic
person about cancer and what are you
most optimistic and excited about in
terms of of treatment I'm gonna answer
the question in two ways I'm gonna talk
about treatment but I also want to talk
about advocacy I want to talk to you
about advocacy in particular so let me
talk about treatment for one second and
what's the most exciting well I've been
you know in some ways I'm optimistic but
I think we have in we have an innovation
problem in cancer right now and we need
to address the innovation problem the
innovation problem is that we are
beginning to understand how a cancer
cell works different cancer cells how
different cancer cells work what the
mutations are
what some of the causes are what some of
the antecedent different events are but
we don't have treatments for them it is
an embarrassment we in other words there
are very few arenas of science where the
knowledge of cause and the capacity to
intervene to treat or prevent cancer has
this level of discrepancy many many
fields of science have a poor
understanding of cause or poor
understanding of pathology pathogenesis
but also have no drugs right the cancer
is not that cancer is in a very peculiar
moment and it's an it is a it is a
touching moment because you go to a
patient imagine going to patients say I
understand I know not in every detail
but I know I understand what the driving
cause of your cancer is right down to
the molecular level but I cannot offer
you a single I can't offer you therapy I
can't offer you treatment it is a
frustrating time is a frustrating time
and so there are so many advances which
are helping a little bit but they're
really just extending life by three or
four months yes some of them are some of
them are transformative some of them
some of them are doing more than
extending life by three or four months I
mean if you know if you go back to
leukemia if you go back to Sidney
Farber's example of childhood leukemia
you could say to yourself you know I'm
going to be nihilistic about all of this
and it's you know because every trial in
those acute leukemia trials extended
life by four or five months but four or
five months plus four or five months
plus four or five months plus four or
five months eventually equals five years
ten years twenty years right so the way
out is the way through we don't have
magic solutions we have to try things we
need people to be involved we need a
national platform we need money and we
need advocacy so it's hard for me to say
you know here is one magic substance
that's not in fact that there isn't
there is no single line it depends on
the cancer there's no single line which
is more interesting than the others but
a combination will health and we need to
find a way to make those combinations
happen this should give you one example
for the first time in in melanoma
actually another number was it was it
was it
an illness was a form of cancer when we
were training as fellows and we share
your nephew was my co fellow so we have
a we have a long connection but when we
were training his fellows it was
impossible to find a trainee who said I
want to be a melanoma doctor because it
was so hopeless well I said on the
admissions committee at Columbia two out
of every five young men and women who
want to be fellows in cancer want to do
melanoma in the span of five or ten
years it has changed so dramatically
because they are too new to new
medicines and for the first time in the
history as of as far as I can tell all
of this arena two pharmaceutical
companies have decided that they're
going to take their fledgling drugs and
combine them in a clinical trial
I mean do two efforts of people like
Deborah and very other people they have
brought they have brought a platform
such that you know this bickering
between pharmaceutical companies the
protection of single drugs can be
overcome and they can come about and
share resources and really move the
field forward this is as I said this is
not someone else's problem
the CEO of those two pharmaceutical
companies has first-degree relatives if
not himself or herself
who will be affected by one of these
forms of cancer so there is a personal
investment there is an advocacy
investment and that's changing and
that's what makes me optimistic long
answer no that's okay I think you have
some questions really my hustle team my
question is when I take everybody in the
he thinks about cancer has which is how
fast will there be cures for most
cancers in your group I don't think that
all cancers will be curable I think we
will cure some we will prevent some we
will treat some and some we will convert
into chronic diseases I think that bar
is high enough I think that that is
already setting the bar very high and I
think you know if we could if we could
tackle the problem in this way without
promising the kind of cures that were
promised in the 1970s I think we can
move the field forward now you know 500
years from now will they laugh at us
because you know we were mixing
primitive poisons and surgery and
radiation to cure cancer they probably
will I hope so but I suspect that it's
not going to be a simple answer it's
going to be a patchwork answer some
cures some treatments some prevention an
extension of life valuable extension of
life 10 years 15 years 20 years yes just
all hurts who discovered radioactive
iodine and as years didn't the cure for
thyroid cancer that's pretty cool can I
just say that yeah well I have to tell
you something it's been a long journey
for me as the doctor knows in terms of
getting his recognition in that he
discovered this in the late 1940s when
he came back from the Manhattan Project
serving in the Navy and he was at Mass
General Hospital and I have to make note
that he was one of two choose in the
entire Hospital and at the time in the
late 1930s there was a high degree of
anti-semitism was verboten couldn't
couldn't join the faculty no couldn't
join the faculty they were quotas in
medical school he went to Harvard
Medical School but my question for you
is how is this so unique and a treatment
that has lasted for 70 years and is
there any hope of this medic medicine or
the type of treatment that he developed
in treating other types of cancer
you know thyroid first of all thank you
for your father for inventing this this
actually saved the lives of hundreds of
thousands of men women the the the
answers tyroid cancers that particular
variant of thyroid cancer is very unique
and it's because the thyroid happens to
concentrate iodine pirate it happens to
be a unique organ in our body which
takes iodine and sucks it up and puts it
inside it it concentrate is a good bag
of iodine and therefore if you make
regular active iodine it becomes like a
Trojan horse and it goes into the
thyroid and the Trojan horse and because
it's carrying radioactivity will bombard
the thyroid with radioactivity and
thereby cure some of these variants of
thyroid cancer so it's hard to imagine
that exactly the same idea is going to
apply to other cancers but the principle
of the Trojan horse which is to somehow
load a payload and antibody to payload a
chemical to get into an organ and then
deliver specifically a toxic therapy or
even non-toxic therapy to that organ
comes from this idea comes from your
father's it's a bit of lineage in this
and it's actually now becoming very very
common to look for these kinds of you
should write have you written about your
dad because I think you should write a
piece about it and about him and put it
in the New York Times yes
very much thank you very much both of
you for your comments and the
presentation this evening you talked
about needing more money and I'm I'm
curious about sort of exactly where you
think the money will be would be most
useful and is most needed I think many
of us kind of assume that especially
compared to other medical conditions
cancer is kind of well funded well known
lots of organizations etc so we're in
the sort of process is the money needed
is it basic research is a translational
it is so the answer is it's needed for
every level it is primarily needed for
innovation it the money generates the
innovative innovation cycles but to me
what the the most for me the most moving
things I read testimonies about my book
is when a young trainee comes and says I
got inspired to go into oncology or into
cancer research because I read this book
that is to me that that is a job that is
a job done for me because they did that
is what the purpose of of all of this
was to some extent people have come up
to me and said you know I was going to I
was going to I was going to do something
else would be a banker but I have
decided to be high exactly
just kidding I love bankers they're
great but I decided to go into oncology
to me that is a moving testimony of of
the power to influence young men and
women's minds because if they're not
going to be doing the inventing who's
gonna be doing you'd be doing a 20 so
but it requires a a broad investment and
a kind of investment that transcends
multiple levels all the way from the
National Cancer Institute all the way
down to the all the way down to training
individual trainees through grants
through foundational grants etc what is
the two words which are institute two
ideas wrenching to me one is the idea I
was looking through the record I was
visiting the NIH and the NCI and I was
thinking about how moving and how
transformative is the idea of taking a
Public Health Service whose job was to
protect Americans really from
immigration from outside so the disease
is brought about by
immigrants coming from outside which is
really the conception of the Public
Health Service and to turn the idea of
protection around and say protection is
about ourselves to say that the the job
of the National Institute of Health is
security it used to be the idea the old
idea of security which is securely our
threats from outside to turn it on and
say you know really security and I'm
reading that word from right up there
you know in future days which we make
which which we which we seek to make
secure security is about health you know
what what manner of security could you
give anyone if it wasn't the security of
good health that idea is to me a
profoundly American idea to be able to
turn it around and to say that threat is
not from all so let's really look inside
and find where how we can make security
happen and that's the idea I would put
out into each every one of us and say
what is your sense where would you think
your money is best spent in order to
secure the lives of yourself and the
lives of your children is it in clinical
research then give money to pimple
research is it in basic research
I mean you follow your drive everywhere
and I think and the answer will be there
it has to do with creating innovative
ways to think around a problem that is
in of enormous consequence to humanity
part of the problem is can I just time
to hear is that government funding has
pretty much flatlined in recent years
and it hasn't kept up with the pace of
inflation inflation also only one in ten
promising research proposals is funded
by the NCI so a lot of these scientist
young researchers spend months coming up
with these proposals and nine of them
end up on the cutting room floor and so
that's why I think a lot of private
individuals and philanthropy answer and
other organizations have decided you
know yes you think that it's it's really
well funded but it it really doesn't get
the funding it deserves so I'm going to
make a shameless plug for stand up to
cancer just because we changed the
paradigm of how research is being
conducted so about four years four or
five years ago some we say hell has hath
no fury like some pissed off women
and a bunch of us got together Sherry
Lansing in LA Laura Ziskin who passed
away recently from breast cancer who was
a very renowned Hollywood producer and
wonderful person who did spider-man and
all these other movies she was dealing
with breast cancer at the time and some
other the entertainment industry
Foundation which is the philanthropic
arm of Hollywood we decided that we
wanted to bring more attention to cancer
so we started doing these televised
events by annually every other year we
do these shows that were on all the
networks the whole Hollywood community
would come out we got a lot of corporate
sponsors and basically raised 180
million dollars so far for cancer
research but we didn't want to just
throw it out we wanted to do it
strategically and intelligently and I
noticed through my cancer advocacy work
that cancer research is very proprietary
and still very competitive and political
like everything in life what isn't
political so we did it we have a mandate
that these scientists have to actually
work together from various institutions
and so they form what we call dream
teams that actually have to share
information resources experience even
tissue samples so we can move science
faster and they have to have a it has to
go from the lab to a clinical trial in
three years rather than 11 years which
is the typical amount of time it takes
from trying to come up with a new drug
and then actually using it on patients
so at first the doctors and scientists
and researchers were a little threatened
by this whole new paradigm they didn't
want to necessarily share their research
and then they became incredibly
galvanized and sort of really jazzed
about the whole prospect and it really
gave them a whole new lease on life are
we have a scientific advisory board we
deal with the American Association of
cancer researchers and one of the
interesting things about the grant
process is Phil sharp who's a Nobel
laureate from MIT heads the the
committee is there's a lot of
interactivity between the scientists who
are applying for the grants and the
people stand up to cancer giving the
grants and when you do something for the
NCI there's very little interaction
where
where scientists can really question the
researcher on sort of all those
complicated scientific things that I
don't really understand so anyways so so
they are actually making really exciting
progress I just went to a meeting in
Florida we have a pancreatic cancer
dream team and they're starting to see
life expectancy for pancreatic cancer
patients increase we have a lung cancer
dream team we have epigenetics which
said we'll explain better than I will
which is sort of I'll try the messaging
sort of the out external messaging
that's outside a cell that sort of
messaging signaling the DNA to behave a
certain way that's epigenetics
epigenetics I would say wrong and so
it's really really exciting and I think
that hopefully we'll see more of this
collaboration in the future because I
think it it gives it motivates people
and and and it's it's nucleated a whole
series of various you know various other
projects to come to mind we talked a
little bit about the melanoma Research
Alliance the myeloma you have a dream
team - exactly yeah melih
are you with yeah we just started it the
melanoma dream team whew and the myeloma
the myeloma also run by the way I was
talking I was asking Katie where all the
men these these advocacy like from Mary
Lasker onwards these dream teams have
been spearheaded by women advocates I
mean there some men I'm sorry but I'm
saying something horribly politically
incorrect but oh I hate that said yes um
so one of the things that we haven't
addressed is how do you get unapproved
drugs yes not to take 12 years and
billions of dollars so even if the drugs
promising if there's no financial
payback at some point with the company
they're going to let it go yes and also
since they won't extend them and how do
you get a drug companies not to feel
they'll be penalized if they use a lot
of time money effort etc so so so this
actually is a very important question
because it gets to the question of
changing the landscape of how we imagine
drugs being approved how clinical trials
happen and this is not a scientific
question this ultimately is a question
about how we influence lawmakers and
what the new paradigm is going to be now
from the standpoint of the science from
the standpoint of the clinical trials
we're trying to invent new clinical
trials the old model of clinical trial
was what I call the try try try again
model which is you know you you enroll
2,000 patients and you see a difference
of 3 months so then you enroll 10,000
patients and you see a difference of 3
and a half months and then you enroll
50,000 patients and you see a difference
of 3 and a half months but four days
right that's the old model the new model
which is now being tried has several
components number one first component is
so the new model is fail fast and fail
early which is you might think it's
counterintuitive to a pharmaceutical
company but it's in fact any model which
is 90% of the medicines that we think
are going to work are not going to work
and instead of spending billions of
dollars on these medicines that will
ultimately not really make a difference
let them fail early do small trials do
pilot studies and fail them fail them
fail them so that then you can get
behind the medicines that really do work
and therefore you can really capitalize
on real things that make a real
difference to human biology so that's it
that's a complete change in the way we
run and think about trials
point number two rather than finishing a
massive trial and going backwards and
this actually one of the dream teams is
trying to do this rather than finishing
trial and going backwards and figuring
out who who responded who didn't respond
try to build in what are called self
learning trials which is during the
trial itself during the clinical trial
itself the trial is learning what it's
doing by feeding back the data it's
blinded still but feeding back the data
it's imagines like a computer that
learns as it moves along so these are
these are some of the innovative ideas
we
that we have to do not only with
inventing new chemicals or new
biologicals but have to do with the
structure of trials changing the way we
imagine statistics that's an important
contribution changing the way we imagine
patent law it's an important
contribution so there's a vast amount of
things to be done let me just let me
just say one last thing about about the
the nature of the funding we always
think that this is big money there's a
word you know cancer equals big money
the annual budget of the National Cancer
Institute is five billion dollars what
does five billion dollars get the air
conditioning bill of the war in the
Middle East was more than five billion
dollars the oil subsidies in the United
States the subsidies for oil in the
United States are nearly twice five
billion dollars
the annual the monthly spending of the
the United States Army in the Gulf per
month in 2008 per month was greater than
the combined budget of the National
Cancer Institute and the Food and Drug
Administration every month we spend more
on keeping an arm keeping armed forces
in the Gulf then we spend combined the
annual budgets of the National Cancer
Institute plus the annual budget of the
Food and Drug Administration so we're
talking about money these are important
numbers but let's not lose perspective
of what that money is well those are
certainly statistics that we will all
keep in mind just as Katie had I think
ten questions she didn't I wasn't able
to ask and said that she could have
stayed here all evening
I assure you that all of us here in the
audience could have and would like to
stay here all evening but unfortunately
we cannot I can I'm not doing anything
no it was absolutely scintillating
inspiring we're very lucky to have both
of you part of the Aspen family and we
thank all of you for being here this
evening thank you thank you
you